# spindle - a tool to help spin distribution images

## FORK GOALS

This is a fork of spindle, with the aim to build a raspberry distribution that
can boot completely headless, just like a cloud VM. This requires each user to
build their own image, customized with:

    - root user ssh keys (no other users are created)
    - if the pi boots without a known ip, a ssh tunnel proxy host, ssh key with
      access to the tunnel host, and tunnel host pubkeys.
    - if wifi is needed, ssid and password can be set in the build step
    - hostname is configurable in the build step

Having a secure-by-default layout requires a couple of things:
    - ssh 6.9 (with ed25519 support) installed instead of dropbear
    - build should not depend on any files fetched over http
    - builds should be very minimal, ie. no kernel modules for sound or uio,
      hwrng that helps feed /dev/random
    - preseeded random pool created from building machine
    - no X or other learning tools
    - no default users/passwords
    - ssh host keys can optionally be added in the build step
    - hdmi will not be disabled, to be able to debug boot problems
    - likewise for usb to enable the use of direct keyboard
    - expands root partition automatically on first boot
    - preferably would use a VM to build the image to enable it to be built
      from any platform. (this is probably the costliest step)

## Description
spindle is a set of scripts to aid building and working on a distribution 
image. I've been using this tool to generate Debian wheezy images for the 
Raspberry Pi, with the aim of producing reproducible, unbooted, clean setups 
that require no manual intervention. It works by producing a series of image 
files in QEMU's QED format (I exploit the format's support for backing files 
and copy on write).

It's not massively user friendly yet, but hopefully that should soon change 
(and of course, patches are welcome).

## Project links
* [Home](http://asbradbury.org/projects/spindle/)
* [Source](https://github.com/asb/spindle)
* [Issues](https://github.com/asb/spindle/issues)

## Current scripts
* `setup_spindle_environment`: Sets up an schroot using wheezy and installs 
the pre-requisites needed for spindle (mainly QEMU, as it turns out I haven't 
used augeas). If you don't use this, please make sure you have at least QEMU 
1.0.1
* `wheezy-stage0`: Create and partition an SD card image, perform the initial 
debootstrap on the host and copy the files to the SD image.
* `wheezy-stage1`: Complete second stage of debootstrap under QEMU after first 
setting up a squashfs filesystem derived from Rob Landley's excellent 
Aboriginal Linux. Setup dropbear.
* `wheezy-stage2`: Add in Raspberry Pi 'firmware' and do misc config (e.g.  
fstab, network interfaces, hostname). The resulting image is bootable.
* `wheezy-stage3`: Install and configure a few useful packages (such as 
ifplugd, sudo).
* `wheezy-stage4-lxde`: Set up the lxde desktop.
* `wheezy-stage4-lxde-edu`: Install MIT Scratch, Python development tools and 
other packages.

## Getting started
The following describes how to start building SD card images using spindle.  
The process isn't massively user friendly for people with no experience at 
all, but if you're currently doing this by hand then hopefully you'll find it 
helpful. Note that executing the `downgrade_qemu` script is necessary on most 
Debian and Ubuntu versions right now.

    sudo ./setup_spindle_environment  my_spindle_chroot
    sudo modprobe nbd max_part=16
    schroot -c spindle
    sudo ./downgrade_qemu
    ./wheezy-stage0
    ./wheezy-stage1
    ./wheezy-stage2
    ./wheezy-stage3
    ./wheezy-stage4-lxde
    ./helper export_image_for_release out/stage4-lxde.qed stage4-lxde.img

Now you can write stage4-lxde.img to SD card.

Take a look at `wheezy-stage4-lxde` to see how to add your own stage if you 
want further customisation.

## HACKING
If you want to contribute, please do file issues on the bug tracker or send in 
patches/pull requests.

spindle is written in POSIX shell script and tries to make use of QEMU where 
possible for manipulating the filesystem of the target being generated. Look 
at the current scripts for examples. Please do talk to me if you're thinking 
of any large refactoring.

Good resources for shell scripting include:

* `man dash`
* [The POSIX standard](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/utilities/xcu_chap02.html)
* [Insufficiently known POSIX shell features](http://apenwarr.ca/log/?m=201102#28)
* [Common shell scripting mistakes](http://www.pixelbeat.org/programming/shell_script_mistakes.html)

## License
MIT. See the LICENSE file.

## Contact
Author: Alex Bradbury  
Email: <asb@asbradbury.org>  
Homepage: <http://asbradbury.org/>
